---
title: Gasket v6.0
date:  2021-02-09 10:30:00 -0700
description: We have released Gasket 6!
slug: version-6
authors: kbader
tags: [Node.js, Gasket, Next.js, Javascript]
hide_table_of_contents: false
---

## We have released Gasket 6!

<iframe src="https://giphy.com/embed/DhstvI3zZ598Nb1rFf" width="480" height="400" frameBorder="0" class="giphy-embed" allowFullScreen></iframe><p><a href="https://giphy.com/gifs/theoffice-the-office-episode-23-tv-DhstvI3zZ598Nb1rFf">via GIPHY</a></p>

<!-- truncate -->

The core updates encompass a few main themes:
- Decoupling from Redux
- Support for Next.js 10
- Simplification of Intl implementation
- Improved Static Site Generation Support
- Webpack 5 Support
- Legacy Code Cleanup

## Decoupling from Redux

To make Gasket less prescriptive, we have made efforts to decouple the
dependency on Redux across our packages and plugins. This does not mean that we
have removed support for Redux; only that we wish to allow space for other
options.

Gasket 6 introduces a new package called [@gasket/data]. This package makes
accessing server-side data and configurations from the client possible without
Redux.

Check out our [@gasket/data package docs]!

## Support for Next.js 10

We have also tuned up our packages and plugins to work with Next.js 10!

We have created a new [@gasket/nextjs] package, which will inject a GasketData
script into the DOM. This script is consumed by the [@gasket/data] package to
make server-side data available to the browser.

With this update, we have also removed built-in support for `next-routes`.
Instead, we encourage using [Next.js default page routing].

## Simplify Intl Implementation

### _Intl Plugin_

The [@gasket/plugin-intl] plugin has been updated to no longer require Redux as
a dependency. It has been simplified to use the gasket data package instead.

Also, locale files are now served from the `public/locales/` folder by default.
However, you are able to configure this location in your `gasket.config.js` with
the `intl.localesDir` option. This enables source locale files to be easily
deployed to a CDN along with other static content. If you wish to continue
serving the locale files from your app, this can be enabled using the
`intl.serveStatic` config options.

If your app is using locale files from NPM module dependencies, this is an
opt-in feature now, which can be enabled in the Gasket config using the
`intl.modules` config option.

### _Intl Package_

To clarify the purpose of this Gasket Intl package and differentiate it from any
future tie-in packages (Vue, Svelte, etc), it has been renamed to
[@gasket/react-intl].

The [@gasket/react-intl] package has also been updated with simplified locale
paths, and the removal of server-rendered pages with preloaded locale files.

Refer to the [@gasket/react-intl docs] for more details.

## Improved Static Site Generation Support

To improve static site generation support, we have updated a few of our
lifecycle signatures with a new `context` object. The purpose for this is to
allow these lifecycle methods the option to be run at build time without a
request object, or at run time, when the request object is present.

## Webpack 5 Support

Webpack 5 support is now available! We have tuned all our plugins and packages
to support Webpack 5.

With this update, we have removed the generated Webpack config defaults, as the
previously prescribed config options have changed. You can find more info about
configuring Node.js options with Webpack 5 on the [webpack website].

## Legacy Code Cleanup

In an effort to keep the Gasket code base clear and concise, we have opted to
remove fallback naming support. This will require all plugins and packages to be
aligned to the project-type prefixed naming convention. This formatting allows
user plugins to be referenced with short names and will help avoid collisions.

### _Fetch_

Gasket is no longer providing a browser ponyfill for the `fetch` API. If you are
supporting older browsers that don't have `fetch`, please bring your own
polyfill.

You can find more info about various polyfills at [polyfill.io].

## Upgrading to Gasket 6

If you wish to upgrade an existing application to Gasket 6, we have created a
comprehensive [upgrade guide] to walk you through the steps to upgrade!

<!-- LINKS -->
[@gasket/data]: https://github.com/godaddy/gasket/tree/master/packages/gasket-data
[@gasket/data package docs]: https://gasket.dev/#/packages/gasket-data/README
[upgrade guide]: https://gasket.dev/#/docs/upgrades
[webpack website]: https://webpack.js.org/configuration/node/
[@gasket/nextjs]: https://github.com/godaddy/gasket/tree/master/packages/gasket-nextjs
[Next.js default page routing]: https://nextjs.org/docs/routing/introduction
[@gasket/plugin-intl]: https://github.com/godaddy/gasket/tree/master/packages/gasket-plugin-intl
[@gasket/react-intl]: https://github.com/godaddy/gasket/tree/master/packages/gasket-react-intl
[@gasket/react-intl docs]: https://gasket.dev/#/packages/gasket-react-intl/README
[polyfill.io]: https://polyfill.io/
