# Configuring Gasket

There are two parts to configuring a Gasket application: configuring the
behavior of Gasket itself and configuring application-specific settings. This
guide discusses the first topic. For the second, the config plugin makes
app-level config more convenient. The documentation for that is covered in the
[config plugin's documentation][config plugin].

All configuration of the Gasket plugins is centralized in a `gasket.config.js`
file in the root of your application. This file must be a CommonJS file
exporting a config object. This must be present for the CLI to know it is
operating in the context of an app and to configure itself accordingly.

## Presets and Plugins

To configure plugins and presets for an app, update the `plugins` object in
`gasket.config.js`. This consists of three string arrays:

```js
module.exports = {
  plugins: {
    presets: [ /* Presets you would like to add */ ],
    add:     [ /* Plugins to add after presets are added */ ],
    remove:  [ /* Plugins to remove */ ]
  },
  // ...
}
```

### Short names

Items in these arrays are module names. Gasket supports shorthand naming;
`'@gasket/mocha'` expands to `@gasket/plugin-mocha` in the `add` and `remove`
arrays. For `presets`, `@gasket/nextjs` expands to `@gasket/preset-nextjs`.

See the [naming convention] for more details.

## Environments

The configuration system supports the concept of
[environments](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deployment_environment). An
application will have certain configuration values that are not
environment-specific and some, like service URLs, which are. Additionally, an
environment may be subdivided further in other ways, for example distributed in
multiple data centers, needing to use specific URLs for DC-local deployments of
dependencies.

To augment the base `gasket.config.js` with environment-specific config, add an
"environments" property to the config object, set to an object. Each key in this
object should be an environment identifier, and each value is a configuration
structure to deep merge into the base config. Use `.` in these keys to specify
sub-environments. For example, here's a theoretical `gasket.config.js`:

```js
module.exports = {
  someService: {
    enableSomeFeature: false
  },
  
  environments: {
    dev: {
      someService: {
        url: 'https://your-dev-service-endpoint.com'
      }
    },
    test: {
      someService: {
        url: 'https://your-test-service-endpoint.com'
      }
    },
    prod: {
      someService: {
        enableSomeFeature: true
      }
    },
    'prod.datacenter1': {
      someService: {
        url: 'https://your-datacenter1-prod-service-endpoint.com'
      }
    },
    'prod.datacenter2': {
      someService: {
        url: 'https://your-datacenter2-prod-service-endpoint.com'
      }
    }
  }
};
```

When accessing configuration in the `prod.datacenter1` environment, the base
configuration is augmented with the `prod` environment settings, then the
`prod.datacenter1` settings, resulting in:

```json
{
  "someService": {
    "enableSomeFeature": true,
    "url": "https://your-datacenter1-prod-service-endpoint.com"
  }
}
```

The last step is making sure that Gasket is told which environment it is running
in when starting up. There are three ways of doing this. The first would be to
set the `NODE_ENV` environment variable. The second would be to pass an `--env`
command line argument when running any `gasket` command. The third is to
programmatically set an `env` property at the top level of your configuration,
which would enable you to use any arbitrary environment derivation logic.

## Local development configuration

The environment for local development is somewhat of a special case in Gasket.
For one, you'll typically start via the `gasket local` command to use a special
development-friendly version of the server instead of `gasket start`. These
commands are enabled for apps by the by the [start plugin]. Additionally, you
may have local settings you want to change without accidentally committing the
changes to your repository, like pointing to locally-running dependencies.

To support easy local development, the Gasket CLI can read a special
`gasket.config.local.js`, use the `local` environment in `gasket.config.js`, or
`gasket.config.local.json` file and merge it in with your `dev` configuration
environment. This file should be in your `.gitignore` file so that each
developer can have distinct overrides.

## Accessing Gasket configuration in your application

Configuring your app code through the `gasket.config.js` file is not
recommended. See the [config plugin] docs for more information on maintaining
application configuration. If you must access the Gasket configuration, you can
add a [lifecycle script][lifecycle plugin] to your application and access the
Gasket configuration via the `gasket.config` property:

```js
// lifecycles/express.js

module.exports = (gasket, app) => {
  const gasketConfig = gasket.config;
  // ...
};
```

## External configuration

### Authoring a config plugin

If a config plugin does not yet exist for your configuration platform, writing
one is straightforward. For Gasket-level configuration, hook the `configure`
event. Your hook will be passed a config object, and you'll return an augmented
config object or a Promise containing one for async config.

```js
// theoretical.js plugin
module.exports = {
  hooks: {
    async configure(gasket, baseConfig) {
      const remoteConfig = await theoreticalClient.getConfig(baseConfig.theoretical.url);
      return {
        ...baseConfig,
        ...remoteConfig
      };
    }
  }
}
```

The [config plugin] has similar lifecycle hooks available for application-level
configuration.

[config plugin]: /packages/gasket-plugin-config/README.md
[start plugin]: /packages/gasket-plugin-start/README.md
[lifecycle plugin]: /packages/gasket-plugin-lifecycle/README.md
[naming convention]: /packages/gasket-resolve/README.md
